docs/py/ui.rst, before:

.. _python_interface:

Python Interface
================
The Python interface of VUnit is exposed through the :class:`VUnit
class <vunit.ui.VUnit>` that can be imported directly. See the
:ref:`User Guide <user_guide>` for a quick introduction. The
following list provides detailed references of the Python API and
about how to set compilation and simulation options.

.. toctree::

   vunit
   opts

.. _configurations:

Configurations
--------------
In VUnit Python API the name ``configuration`` is used to denote the
user controllable configuration of one test run such as
generic/parameter settings, simulation options as well as the
pre_config and post_check :ref:`callback functions <pre_and_post_hooks>`.
User :ref:`attributes <attributes>` can also be added as a part of a
configuration.

Configurations can either be unique for each test case or must be
common for the entire test bench depending on the situation.  For test
benches without test such as `tb_example` in the User Guide the
configuration is common for the entire test bench. For test benches
containing tests such as `tb_example_many` the configuration is done
for each test case. If the ``run_all_in_same_sim`` attribute has been used
configuration is performed at the test bench level even if there are
individual test within since they must run in the same simulation.

In a VUnit all test benches and test cases are created with an unnamed default
configuration which is modified by different methods such as ``set_generic`` etc.
In addition to the unnamed default configuration multiple named configurations
can be derived from it by using the ``add_config`` method. The default
configuration is only run if there are no named configurations.

.. _attributes:

Attributes
----------
The user may set custom attributes on test cases via comments or via the
``set_attribute`` method. The attributes can for example be used to achieve
requirements trace-ability. The attributes are exported in the
:ref:`JSON Export <json_export>`. All user defined attributes must start
with a dot (``.``) as non-dot attributes are reserved for built-in
attributes.

Attributes set via the python interface will effectively overwrite the value
of a user attribute set via code comments.

Example
<<<<<<<
.. code-block:: vhdl
   :caption: VHDL Example

   if run("Test 1") then
       -- vunit: .requirement-117
   end if;


.. code-block:: verilog
   :caption: SystemVerilog Example

   `TEST_SUITE begin
       `TEST_CASE("Test 1") begin
           // vunit: .requirement-117
        end
    end


.. code-block:: python
   :caption: Python Example

   my_test.set_attribute(".requirement-117", None)


.. code-block:: json
   :caption: JSON Export has attributes attached to each test. The
             attributes added via comments all have null value to be
             forward compatible in a future where user attributes can
             have values. Attributes set via python can have basic type
             values.

    {
       "attributes": {
            ".requirement-117": null
       }
    }


.. _pre_and_post_hooks:

Pre and post simulation hooks
-----------------------------
There are two hooks to run user defined Python code.

:pre_config: A ``pre_config`` is called before simulation of the test
             case. The function may accept an ``output_path`` string
             which is the filesystem path to the directory where test
             outputs are stored. The function must return ``True`` or
             the test will fail immediately.

             The use case is to automatically create input data files
             that is read by the test case during simulation. The test
             bench can access the test case unique ``output_path`` via
             a :ref:`special generic/parameter <special_generics>`.

:post_check: A ``post_check`` is called after a passing simulation of
             the test case. The function may accept an ``output_path``
             string which is the filesystem path to the directory
             where test outputs are stored. The function may accept an
             ``output`` string which full standard output from the
             test containing the simulator transcript. The function
             must return ``True`` or the test will fail.

             The use case is to automatically check output data files
             that is written by the test case during simulation. The test
             bench can access the test case unique ``output_path`` via
             a :ref:`special generic/parameter <special_generics>`.

             .. note::
                The ``post_check`` function is only called after a
                passing test and skipped in case of failure.


Example
<<<<<<<
    .. code-block:: python

       class DataChecker:
           """
           Provides input data to test bench and checks its output data
           """
           def __init__(self, data):
               self.input_data = data

           def pre_config(self, output_path):
               write_data(self.input_data, join(output_path, "input.csv"))
               return True

           def post_check(self, output_path):
               expected = compute_expected(self.input_data)
               got = read_data(join(output_path, "output.csv"))
               return check_equal(got, expected)

       # Just change the original test
       checker = DataChecker(data=create_random_data(seed=11))
       my_test.set_pre_config(checker.pre_config)
       my_test.set_post_check(checker.post_check)

       # .. or create many configurations of the test
       for seed in range(10, 20):
           checker = DataChecker(data=create_random_data(seed))
           my_test.add_config(name="seed%i" % seed,
                              pre_config=checker.pre_config,
                              post_check=checker.post_check)


.. automodule:: vunit.vunit_cli

Commit message:

Added documentation for the handling of VHDL configurations.

docs/py/ui.rst, after:

.. _python_interface:

Python Interface
================
The Python interface of VUnit is exposed through the :class:`VUnit
class <vunit.ui.VUnit>` that can be imported directly. See the
:ref:`User Guide <user_guide>` for a quick introduction. The
following list provides detailed references of the Python API and
about how to set compilation and simulation options.

.. toctree::

   vunit
   opts

.. _configurations:

Configurations
--------------
In VUnit Python API the name ``configuration`` is used to denote the
user controllable configuration of one test run such as
generic/parameter settings, simulation options as well as the
pre_config and post_check :ref:`callback functions <pre_and_post_hooks>`.
User :ref:`attributes <attributes>` can also be added as a part of a
configuration.

VHDL configurations for test bench entities are automatically discovered
and added to the set of configurations created in Python.

Python-defined configurations can either be unique for each test case or
must be common for the entire test bench depending on the situation.
For test benches without tests such as `tb_example` in the User Guide
the configuration is common for the entire test bench. For test benches
containing tests such as `tb_example_many` the configuration is done for
each test case. If the ``run_all_in_same_sim`` attribute has been used
configuration is performed at the test bench level even if there are
individual test within since they must run in the same simulation.

In VUnit all test benches and test cases are created with an unnamed default
configuration which is modified by different methods such as ``set_generic`` etc.
In addition to the unnamed default configuration multiple named configurations
can be derived from it by using the ``add_config`` method or by defining a
VHDL configuration. The default configuration is only run if there are no
named configurations.

Named configurations can be retrieved from test benches and tests using the
``get_configs`` methods and then modified using methods such as ``set_pre_config``.
This is especially useful for VHDL configurations which are automatically
detected and added without any of the configuration capabilities provided
by the Python API. Note that generics can't be added to a VHDL-defined
configuration as that is not allowed in VHDL.

.. _attributes:

Attributes
----------
The user may set custom attributes on test cases via comments or via the
``set_attribute`` method. The attributes can for example be used to achieve
requirements trace-ability. The attributes are exported in the
:ref:`JSON Export <json_export>`. All user defined attributes must start
with a dot (``.``) as non-dot attributes are reserved for built-in
attributes.

Attributes set via the python interface will effectively overwrite the value
of a user attribute set via code comments.

Example
<<<<<<<
.. code-block:: vhdl
   :caption: VHDL Example

   if run("Test 1") then
       -- vunit: .requirement-117
   end if;


.. code-block:: verilog
   :caption: SystemVerilog Example

   `TEST_SUITE begin
       `TEST_CASE("Test 1") begin
           // vunit: .requirement-117
        end
    end


.. code-block:: python
   :caption: Python Example

   my_test.set_attribute(".requirement-117", None)


.. code-block:: json
   :caption: JSON Export has attributes attached to each test. The
             attributes added via comments all have null value to be
             forward compatible in a future where user attributes can
             have values. Attributes set via python can have basic type
             values.

    {
       "attributes": {
            ".requirement-117": null
       }
    }


.. _pre_and_post_hooks:

Pre and post simulation hooks
-----------------------------
There are two hooks to run user defined Python code.

:pre_config: A ``pre_config`` is called before simulation of the test
             case. The function may accept an ``output_path`` string
             which is the filesystem path to the directory where test
             outputs are stored. The function must return ``True`` or
             the test will fail immediately.

             The use case is to automatically create input data files
             that is read by the test case during simulation. The test
             bench can access the test case unique ``output_path`` via
             a :ref:`special generic/parameter <special_generics>`.

:post_check: A ``post_check`` is called after a passing simulation of
             the test case. The function may accept an ``output_path``
             string which is the filesystem path to the directory
             where test outputs are stored. The function may accept an
             ``output`` string which full standard output from the
             test containing the simulator transcript. The function
             must return ``True`` or the test will fail.

             The use case is to automatically check output data files
             that is written by the test case during simulation. The test
             bench can access the test case unique ``output_path`` via
             a :ref:`special generic/parameter <special_generics>`.

             .. note::
                The ``post_check`` function is only called after a
                passing test and skipped in case of failure.


Example
<<<<<<<
    .. code-block:: python

       class DataChecker:
           """
           Provides input data to test bench and checks its output data
           """
           def __init__(self, data):
               self.input_data = data

           def pre_config(self, output_path):
               write_data(self.input_data, join(output_path, "input.csv"))
               return True

           def post_check(self, output_path):
               expected = compute_expected(self.input_data)
               got = read_data(join(output_path, "output.csv"))
               return check_equal(got, expected)

       # Just change the original test
       checker = DataChecker(data=create_random_data(seed=11))
       my_test.set_pre_config(checker.pre_config)
       my_test.set_post_check(checker.post_check)

       # .. or create many configurations of the test
       for seed in range(10, 20):
           checker = DataChecker(data=create_random_data(seed))
           my_test.add_config(name="seed%i" % seed,
                              pre_config=checker.pre_config,
                              post_check=checker.post_check)


.. automodule:: vunit.vunit_cli
